Metrics API specification: incorporate old content on calling conventions, label sets. (#601)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/metrics/api.md

[Context](../context/context.md) (i.e., Span context, Correlation context)
that was active at the time.

## Meter provider

> A `MeterProvider` instance can be obtained by initializing and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A concrete `MeterProvider` implementation can be obtained by initializing and
```

Author: Done.

> configuring an OpenTracing Metrics SDK.  This document does not

Author: Heh.

specify how to construct an SDK, only that they must implement the
`MeterProvider`.  Once configured, the application or library chooses
whether it will use a global instance of the `MeterProvider`
interface, or whether it will use dependency injection for greater
control over configuring the provider.

### Obtaining a Meter

New `Meter` instances can be created via a `MeterProvider` and its

> `GetMeter(name)` method.  `MeterProvider`s are generally expected to

Author: Done.

be used as singletons.  Implementations SHOULD provide a single global
default `MeterProvider`. The `GetMeter` method expects two string
arguments:

- `name` (required): This name must identify the instrumentation library (e.g. `io.opentelemetry.contrib.mongodb`)
  and *not* the instrumented library.

>   In case an invalid name (null or empty string) is specified, a working default `Meter` implementation is returned as a fallback

Reviewer: Note: Java will need to fix this, since we don't accept a null name at the moment.

Author: This should be covered by #587, I think. In Go we haven't given this method the ability to return an error, but we also don't have the ability to pass a "null" string. We need to specify how the empty string should be handled, see also #586. I'd throw this in with #503 and #504 too.

- `version` (optional): Specifies the version of the instrumentation library (e.g. `semver:1.0.0`).

Each distinctly named `Meter` establishes a separate namespace for its
metric instruments, making it possible for multiple instrumentation
libraries to report the metrics with the same instrument name used by
other libraries.  The name of the `Meter` is explicitly not intended
to be used as part of the instrument name, as that would prevent
instrumentation libraries from capturing metrics by the same name.

### Global Meter provider

Use of a global instance may be seen as an anti-pattern in many
situations, but it most cases it is the correct pattern for telemetry
data, in order to combine telemetry data from inter-dependent
libraries _without use of dependency injection_.  OpenTelemetry
language APIs SHOULD offer a global instance for this reason.
Languges that offer a global instance MUST ensure that `Meter`
instances allocated through the global `MeterProvider` and instruments
allocated through those `Meter` instances have their initialization

> deferred until the a global SDK is first initialized.

Reviewer 2: Maybe consider to file an issue to consolidate on this across trace and metrics. No action required now.

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/613

> #### Get the global MetricProvider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Get the global MeterProvider
```

Author: Done.

> Since the global `MetricProvider` is a singleton and supports a single

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the global `MeterProvider` is a singleton and supports a single
```

Author: Done.

method, callers can obtain a global `Meter` using a global `GetMeter`
call.  For example, `global.GetMeter(name, version)` calls `GetMeter`

> on the global `MetricProvider` and returns a named `Meter` instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on the global `MeterProvider` and returns a named `Meter` instance.
```

Author: Done.

> #### Set the global MetricProvider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Set the global MeterProvider
```

Author: Done.

> A global function installs a Metric provider as the global SDK.  For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A global function installs a MetrtProvider as the global SDK.  For
```

Author: Done.

> example, use `global.SetMetricProvider(MetricProvider)` to install the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example, use `global.SetMeterProvider(MeterProvider)` to install the
```

Author: Done.

defined by several properties, detailed here, to assist with
instrument selection.

### Instrument naming requirements

Metric instruments are primarily defined by their name, which is how
we refer to them in external systems.  Metric instrument names conform
to the following syntax:

1. They are non-empty strings
2. They are case-insensitive
3. The first character must be non-numeric, non-space, non-punctuation

> 4. Subsequent characters must be belong to the alphanumeric characters, '_', '.', and '-'.

Author: Done.

Metric instrument names belong to a namespace, established by the the
associated `Meter` instance.  `Meter` implementations MUST return an
error when multiple instruments are registered by the same name.

Metric instrument names SHOULD be semantically meaningful, independent
of the originating Meter name.  For example, when instrumenting an
http server library, "latency" is not an appropriate instrument name,
as it is too generic.  Instead, as an example, we should favor a name

> like "http_request_latency", as it would inform the viewer of the

Author: Done.

semantic meaning of the latency measurement.  Multiple instrumentation

> libraries may be written to generate this metric.

Reviewer 2: I think this section will be replaced by https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/600, maybe just add a note that we expect to have a separate doc for naming.

Reviewer 2: Otherwise the naming may require a long discussion, so I want to move fast and just say that more details will be defined as part of that issue.

Author: I added a TODO and a link to #600.
```
TODO: [The following paragraph is a placeholder for a more-detailed document that is needed.](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/600)
```

### Constructors

The `Meter` interface supports functions to create new, registered
metric instruments.  Instrument constructors are named by adding a

> `New-` prefix to the kind of instrument it constructs.  

Reviewer 2: In java we use a Builder pattern, which does not map exactly to `New-`. I think we should offer that as an alternative, we use `Meter.longCounterBuilder().setDescription().setUnit().build()`

Author: I wrote "Instrument constructors are named by adding a `New-` prefix to the kind of instrument it constructs, with a builder pattern, or some other idiomatic approach in the language."

construct and use globally-scoped metric instruments.

The situation is similar for users of existing Prometheus clients, where
instruments can be allocated to the global `Registerer`.  
Such code may not have access to an appropriate `MeterProvider` or `Meter`
instance at the location where instruments are defined.
Where this becomes a burden, it is
recommended to use the global meter provider to construct a static
named `Meter`, to construct metric instruments.

Applications are expected to construct long-lived instruments.
Instruments are considered permanent for the lifetime of a SDK, there
is no method to delete them.

## Sets of labels

Semantically, a set of labels is a unique mapping from string key to
value.  Across the API, a set of labels MUST be passed in the same,
idiomatic form.  Common representations include an ordered list of
key:values, or a map of key:values.

When labels are passed as an ordered list of key:values, and there are
duplicate keys found, the last value in the list for any given key is
taken in order to form a unique mapping.

The type of the label value is generally presumed to be a string by

> exporters, although as a level-level decision, the label value type

Reviewer: level-level? Should this be "language-level decision"?

Author: Done.

could be any idiomatic type in that langauge that has a string
representation.

### Label performance

Label handling can be a significant cost in the production of metric
data overall.

SDK support for in-process aggregation depends on the ability to find
an active record for an instrument, label set combination pair.  This
allows measurements to be combined.  Label handling costs can be
lowered through the use of bound synchronous instruments and
batch-reporting functions (`RecordBatch`, `BatchObserver`).

### Missing label keys

When the SDK interprets labels in the context of grouping aggregated
values for an exporter, and where there are keys that are missing, the
SDK is required to consider these values _explicitly unspecified_.
There is no implicit "empty" value assumed for label keys that are

> expected but not present.

Reviewer 2: Not sure this belongs here, this is an SDK detail.

Author: Removed.

### Option: Ordered labels

> As a language-level decision, APIs may support label key ordering.  In this

Author: Done.

case, the user may specify an ordered sequence of label keys, which is used to
create an unordered set of labels from a sequence of similarly ordered label
values.  For example:

```golang

var rpcLabelKeys = OrderedLabelKeys("a", "b", "c")

for _, input := range stream {

>     labels := rpcLabelKeys.Values(1, 2, 3)  // a=1, b=2, c=3

Reviewer 2: Interesting possible failure: is the order of the values in the `Values` same as `OrderedLabelKeys`? I am asking because if you sort the keys in `OrderedLabelKeys` that may generate a different order.

Author: That was the intent. I had written `similarly ordered` above to indicate this.

    // ...
}
```

This is specified as a language-optional feature because its safety, and
therefore its value as an input for monitoring, depends on the availability of
type-checking in the source language.  Passing unordered labels (i.e., a

> mapping from keys to values) is considered the safer alternative.

Reviewer 2: Do you have this implemented? I like this. Is OrderedLabelKeys an interface or a concrete implementation.

Author: This was something you asked for and was written into the former `api-user.md`. I've practically lifted it out of the old document without modification.

requires that a specific instrument will be re-used with specific
labels.  If an instrument will be used with the same labels more than
once, obtaining a bound instrument corresponding to the labels ensures
the highest performance available.

To bind an instrument, use the `Bind(labels...)` method to return an
interface that supports the corresponding synchronous API (i.e.,
`Add()` or `Record()`).  Bound instruments are invoked without labels;
the corresponding metric event is associated with the labels that were
bound to the instrument.  Bound instruments may consume SDK resources
indefinitely until the user calls `Unbind()` to release the bound
instrument.

For example, to repeatedly update a counter with the same labels:

```golang
func (s *server) processStream(ctx context.Context) {

  // The result of Bind() is a bound instrument
  // (e.g., a BoundInt64Counter).
  counter2 := s.instruments.counter2.Bind(
      kv.String("labelA", "..."),
      kv.String("labelB", "..."),
  )

  for _, item := <-s.channel {
     // ... other work

     // High-performance metric calling convention: use of bound
     // instruments.
     counter2.Add(ctx, item.size())
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: I would call Unbind (or defer it) in the case the Bind is a local variable. Another example may be to have Bound as a global variable or struct argument.

Author: added a deferred Unbind.

```golang
func (s *server) method(ctx context.Context) {
    // ... other work

    s.instruments.counter1.Add(ctx, 1,
        kv.String("labelA", "..."),
        kv.String("labelB", "..."),
        )
}
```

Direct calls are convenient because they do not require allocating and
storing a bound instrument.  They are appropriate for use in cases
where an instrument will be used rarely, or rarely used with the same
set of labels.  Unlike bound instruments, there is not a long-term
consumption of SDK resources when using the direct calling convention.

#### RecordBatch calling convention

There is one final API for entering measurements, which is like the
direct access calling convention but supports multiple simultaneous
measurements.  The use of the `RecordBatch` API supports entering
multiple measurements, implying a semantically atomic update to
several instruments.  Calls to `RecordBatch` amortize the cost of
label handling across multiple measurements.

For example:

```golang
func (s *server) method(ctx context.Context) {
    // ... other work

    s.meter.RecordBatch(ctx, labels,
        s.instruments.counter1.Measurement(1),
        s.instruments.gauge1.Measurement(10),

>         s.instruments.measure2.Measurement(123.45),

Reviewer 2: Please no `Gauge` :) (update names to reflect the new instrument types).

Author: Fixed.

>     )

Reviewer 2: In Java we do go with a different pattern that has the advantage of not exposing another API `Measurement`.

```
meter.RecordBatch(labels).put(s.instruments.counter1, val).put(s.instruments.upDownCounter1, val).record();
```

Author: I added an example like this, calling it another valid interface. 
nit: it stutters to me, reading `meter.RecordBatch()...record()`, how about `meter.NewBatch(...)....record()`?

Reviewer 2: Good feedback, please file an issue in the java repo.

/cc @jkwatson

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/issues/1253

}
```

> Using the RecordBatch calling convention is semantically identical to

Reviewer 3: To match the `_bound instrument_` syntax above.

```suggestion
Using the _record batch_ calling convention is semantically identical to
```

Author: Done.

2. The library-name and version are implicitly associated with the metric event.

Some existing metric systems support allocating metric instruments
statically and providing the equivalent of a `Meter` interface at the
time of use.  In one example, typical of statsd clients, existing code
may not be structured with a convenient place to store new metric
instruments.  Where this becomes a burden, it is recommended to use
the global `MeterProvider` to construct a static `Meter`, and to
construct and use globally-scoped metric instruments.

The situation is similar for users of existing Prometheus clients, where
instruments can be allocated to the global `Registerer`.  
Such code may not have access to an appropriate `MeterProvider` or `Meter`
instance at the location where instruments are defined.
Where this becomes a burden, it is
recommended to use the global meter provider to construct a static
named `Meter`, to construct metric instruments.

Applications are expected to construct long-lived instruments.
Instruments are considered permanent for the lifetime of a SDK, there
is no method to delete them.

> ## Sets of labels

Reviewer 4: It would be good to clarify that the API does not require user to specify the label keys at metricinstrument construction time, and can free use any label key,value pairs when actual recording is done.
(There are other metric libraries which requires user to specify the labelkeys, at instrument creation time itself, and cannot be changed afterwards, hence the suggestion)

Author: I added
```
Users are not required to pre-declare the set of label keys that will
be used with metric instruments in the API.  Users can freely use any
set of labels for any metric event when calling the API.
```

lowered through the use of bound synchronous instruments and
batch-reporting functions (`RecordBatch`, `BatchObserver`).

### Option: Ordered labels

As a language-level decision, APIs MAY support label key ordering.  In this
case, the user may specify an ordered sequence of label keys, which is used to
create an unordered set of labels from a sequence of similarly ordered label
values.  For example:

```golang

var rpcLabelKeys = OrderedLabelKeys("a", "b", "c")

for _, input := range stream {
    labels := rpcLabelKeys.Values(1, 2, 3)  // a=1, b=2, c=3

    // ...
}
```

This is specified as a language-optional feature because its safety, and
therefore its value as an input for monitoring, depends on the availability of
type-checking in the source language.  Passing unordered labels (i.e., a
mapping from keys to values) is considered the safer alternative.

## Synchronous instrument details

The following details are specified for synchronous instruments.

### Synchronous calling conventions

The metrics API provides three semantically equivalent ways to capture
measurements using synchronous instruments:

- calling bound instruments, which have a pre-associated set of labels

> - calling unbound instruments, passing the associated set of labels directly

Reviewer 4: rest of the doc calls this as direct calling. Would be good to say - calling unbound instrument and direct calling are same.

Author: Thanks! I removed all uses of "unbound" in this way, instead. I feel we should try to avoid duplicate terms.

`RecordBatch()`, another calling convention, is a good option for
improving performance, since the cost of handling labels is spread
across multiple measurements.  The direct calling convention is the
most convenient, but least performant calling convention for entering
measurements through the API.

#### Bound instrument calling convention

In situations where performance is a requirement and a metric
instrument is repeatedly used with the same set of labels, the
developer may elect to use the _bound instrument_ calling convention
as an optimization.  For bound instruments to be a benefit, it
requires that a specific instrument will be re-used with specific
labels.  If an instrument will be used with the same labels more than
once, obtaining a bound instrument corresponding to the labels ensures
the highest performance available.

To bind an instrument, use the `Bind(labels...)` method to return an
interface that supports the corresponding synchronous API (i.e.,
`Add()` or `Record()`).  Bound instruments are invoked without labels;
the corresponding metric event is associated with the labels that were
bound to the instrument.  Bound instruments may consume SDK resources

> indefinitely until the user calls `Unbind()` to release the bound

Reviewer 4: is `Unbind()` part of the API and every language must implement one? ( i don't recollect this was part of public API in earlier specs, though most languages had it implemented)

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/blob/master/api/metric/counter.go#L56  I see Bind() in API, but no UnBind() in API.

Author: Ah, I thought this was stated in an OTEP somewhere but could not find it. I want this as a requirement because without it, the user has to worry about indefinite resource usage associated with bound instruments.  Unbind allows forgetting past metrics. In the OTel-Go implementation, the direct calling convention is implemented simply by Bind(), Record(), Unbind(), but that's not a requirement.

The Go code inherits an `Unbind()` method from the common `syncBoundInstrument` type.

Reviewer 4: I was asking if UnBind() should be a **_public_** api or not. Go implements the direct calling convention by calling bind(), record(), unbind() - but for this unbind() can be a SDK only thing, and not part of user facing API. (as SDK calls this internally)

(In .net we implemented unbind() as NOT public. User still doesnt need to worry about indefinite resource, as SDK removes any boundinstruments created by the SDK itself after 1 or 2 Collect() cycle of no uses.
)

I am absolutely fine to have this discussed separately so that this PR can go ahead.

instrument.

For example, to repeatedly update a counter with the same labels:

```golang
func (s *server) processStream(ctx context.Context) {

  // The result of Bind() is a bound instrument
  // (e.g., a BoundInt64Counter).
  counter2 := s.instruments.counter2.Bind(
      kv.String("labelA", "..."),
      kv.String("labelB", "..."),
  )
  defer counter2.Unbind()

  for _, item := <-s.channel {
     // ... other work

     // High-performance metric calling convention: use of bound
     // instruments.
     counter2.Add(ctx, item.size())
  }
}
```

#### Direct instrument calling convention

When convenience is more important than performance, or there is no re-use to
potentially optimize with bound instruments, users may elect to operate

> directly on metric instruments, supplying labels at the call site.  This method

Reviewer 4: or in cases where the label values are not known ahead of time (bound instrument method cannot be used there.)

Author: Done.

                     kv.String("port", listener.port),
                 )
             }
          }),
          metric.WithDescription("The load factor use for load balancing purposes"),
    )
}

```

#### Batch observer

A `BatchObserver` callback supports observing multiple instruments in
one callback.  Its callback receives an `BatchObserverResult` with an
`Observe(labels, observations...)` function.

An observation is returned by calling `Observation(value)`, on an
asychronous instrument.

```golang
func (s *server) registerObservers(.Context) {
     batch := s.meter.NewBatchObserver(func (result BatchObserverResult) {
          result.Observe(
             []kv.KeyValue{
                 kv.String("name", server.name),
                 kv.String("port", listener.port),
             },
             s.observer1.Observation(value1),
             s.observer2.Observation(value2),
             s.observer3.Observation(value3),
          },
          metric.WithDescription("The load factor use for load balancing purposes"),
    )

     s.observer1 = s.meter.NewSumObserver(..., metric.WithBatch(batch))
     s.observer2 = s.meter.NewSumObserver(..., metric.WithBatch(batch))

>      s.observer3 = s.meter.NewSumObserver(..., metric.WithBatch(batch))

Reviewer 2: Not that it is very important, probably better to call this `WithBatchCallback`?

Author: Sure. In the real OTel-Go repo we went with a different API, so I rewrote this to look more like the real Go code.

A single instrument callback is bound to one instrument.  Its
callback receives an `ObserverResult` with an `Observe(value,
labels...)` function.

```golang
func (s *server) registerObservers(.Context) {
     s.observer1 = s.meter.NewInt64SumObserver(
         "service_load_factor",
          metric.WithCallback(func(result metric.Float64ObserverResult) {
             for _, listener := range s.listeners {
                 result.Observe(
                     s.loadFactor(),
                     kv.String("name", server.name),
                     kv.String("port", listener.port),
                 )
             }
          }),
          metric.WithDescription("The load factor use for load balancing purposes"),
    )
}

```

#### Batch observer

A `BatchObserver` callback supports observing multiple instruments in
one callback.  Its callback receives an `BatchObserverResult` with an
`Observe(labels, observations...)` function.

An observation is returned by calling `Observation(value)`, on an
asychronous instrument.

```golang
func (s *server) registerObservers(.Context) {
     var observer1 metric.SumObserver
     var observer2 metric.UpDownSumObserver

>      var observer3 metric.ValueObserver

Reviewer 3: Minor point, but these are not used in the reset of the example. Is this a duplicate of lines 1016 - 1018?

Author: Yes, fixed.
